Okay, good morning.
My name's Doug Brooks.
I'm product manager of
server hardware at Apple.
And I'd like to --
This session is entitled
HPC Technology Update.
In this session we'd like to
take a look at Apple and HPC,
and specifically Apple products
and technologies that
contribute to HPC deployments.
We'll also look at industry-leading
third-party products that
complement those solutions.
And also we'll hear from two
customers to talk about their
HPC deployments using Apple technology.
First,
let's take a look at Apple and HPC.
Now, in the last year,
when you think of Apple and HPC,
usually the first thing that
comes to your mind is this.
Virginia Tech saw the vision and
power of the G5 and Mac OS X server,
and combining over a thousand
Power Mac G5s and Mac OS X server
software using technology for
interconnect and FinnaBand
achieved phenomenal performance,
achieving over 10 teraflops of computing
power on its debut at rank number three
on the top 500 list and is the number
one academic supercomputer in the world.
An amazing achievement.
And they also really proved the
value and the price point that
you could build and deliver a very
high performance supercomputer
system with Apple technology.
Now what's interesting is while they
may have been the first and definitely
the largest G5 cluster deployment,
they were definitely not the
first Apple cluster deployment.
Matter of fact,
a lot of the early cluster work done
on the Macintosh platform was actually
done a number of years earlier,
most notably at UCLA with
the Appleseeds work.
You may remember this from the late '90s.
Actually, I believe this is circa 1998.
UCLA with the Appleseeds project took,
at the time, you know,
pretty fast technology.
Bayes G3, 233 megahertz systems,
10-way wireless, 10-way wireless,
10-100 Ethernet as an interconnect.
It was running early on Mac OS 8 and was
using Apple events as the middleware.
Nevertheless, doing high-energy physics
work that they were doing,
it achieved phenomenal
performance at very low cost.
And actually, the system you see here on
the screen outperformed Cray
YMP running similar codes.
So again, showing the value,
some of the same things
Virginia Tech has proved with the G5.
They actually shown some
of those same capabilities.
Of course,
we've come a long way since then,
from the G3, Bayes G3 days, of course,
to the G4,
introducing desktop supercomputing
with the Velocity Engine,
bringing phenomenal vector
processing capabilities that many
applications have been able to take a
tremendous benefit from by leveraging
that power and that technology.
And of course, most recently, the G5,
bringing phenomenal
floating-point performance,
vector processing with a system that
delivers very high memory bandwidth and
system throughput through this processor,
providing a phenomenal
foundation for computing.
And of course, customers have responded.
And of course, higher education customers
tend to be on the leading edge.
They've been some of our most
strongest early adopters in
the higher education market.
And of course,
if you heard the last session,
you've heard about some of the
deployments in the scientific field.
Matter of fact,
life sciences in particular has
been adopters of our technology.
And so, we've been able to get a lot
of our customers to come in and
take a look at the technology.
And of course,
we've been able to get a lot
of our customers to come in and
take a look at the technology.
And of course,
we've been able to get a lot
of our customers to come in and
take a look at the technology.
And of course,
we've been able to get a lot
of our customers to come in and
take a look at the technology,
primarily because many of the key
applications that are run day in and
day out in the life sciences arena
have been Velocity Engine optimized
and run very high performance
on the G4 and the G5 processors.
And so, we're seeing lots of deployments
taking advantage of our
tools and our technology,
combined with the ease of
use that we provide in our
systems in the sciences field.
[Transcript missing]
And finally,
we've had a phenomenal customer response.
This is just a small sampling of
customers who have recently deployed
clusters based on Apple technology,
Xserve, and Mac OS X Server.
Really,
we see this market continuing to grow and
more very exciting customer deployments.
And again, you're going to hear about two
of them later on in this session.
As a matter of fact,
we're seeing right now roughly 40% of
our Xserve units going into clusters
and high performance computing.
And as we see as Xserve
continues to grow,
we see this continuing to grow as well
as an important slice of the Xserve pie,
you might say.
What does it take to actually put a
cluster together with Apple technology?
Obviously,
it's a lot more than just racking
a bunch of Xserves in a rack.
So what we want to do is take a
look at the HPC technology stack.
What are the components on Mac OS X that
it takes to build an HPC deployment,
and what technologies and products
are available from Apple and third
parties to complement this stack?
So this is a view of, again,
what we'll say HPC building blocks.
The components that are required to build
a HPC deployment in technology space.
So if we look from the bottom up,
from the hardware,
the actual hardware platform itself,
the operating system, the interconnects,
the compiler and optimization tools,
the communications middleware,
and finally the management tools,
to really do a complete
cluster deployment,
we need components from all of these.
Now if we take a look at what
Apple products and technologies provide,
you'll see Apple provides
products that fit really in
about four of the six areas.
And if we look at third
party technologies,
really industry leading
third party technologies,
we have, again,
about four or six of those components
that we have to choose from.
And as we walk through,
you'll be able to see,
you have a wide selection of
products and technologies for
deploying clusters on Mac OS X.
So let's take a quick review,
walking the stack from the bottom up,
and let's take a quick review
from an Apple perspective
at the hardware components.
So this is pretty straightforward.
First and foremost,
we have the G5 processor.
The G5 processor really stands out as a
processor for high performance computing.
With the 64-bit capabilities,
with the massive floating
point and velocity engine
support in this processor,
coupled with the power
advantages that it has,
with the smaller 90-manometer technology,
really delivers a phenomenal
bang for your buck and for your
power and heat output as well.
So obviously that becomes one of the
core foundation pieces of the product.
As we look up, of course,
then we wrap that up in the XSERV G5.
Been able to provide dual processor
performance and a 1U form factor,
a system that delivers peak
performance of 16 gigaflops of
double precision floating point,
or 32 gigaflops of single precision
floating point with a velocity engine.
Again, a very, very powerful system to
deliver phenomenal performance.
Couple that with the
latest of I/O technologies,
PCI-X, ECC memory,
integrated hardware monitoring for
systems management and monitoring.
And again, very low power when we look
at it compared to competitors.
You know,
roughly a compute node configuration of
XSERV at 100% CPU is under 250 watts of
total power usage and well under 1,000
BTUs an hour in heat output for the data
center that needs to cool these systems.
That significantly lower the competitive
systems and a great advantage that
we have with the G5 processor.
We also have XSERV RAID,
and kind of the corollary to a lot
of computing power is the data that
needs to be fed into those systems,
and that data needs to
be stored somewhere.
We see XSERV RAID as the ideal,
ideal storage device for storing data
for high performance computing clusters.
With phenomenal performance
and phenomenal capacity,
you have the ability to,
through fiber channel,
quite a large amount of storage online
and serve that throughout your cluster.
And again, a breakthrough price
performance with XSERV RAID.
Just again, ideal storage device for high
performance computing clusters.
We then take a look up the next step.
Obviously,
from an operating system perspective,
we have Mac OS X.
Mac OS X has really provided a key
foundation for cluster applications.
What's really unique about Mac OS X is
that we have the ability with Mac OS X to
combine the power of Unix under the hood,
which allows us to bring
applications and technologies over
that allow us to compile and run
those applications on Mac OS X.
But combine that with
the great ease of use,
ease of deployment,
ease of management that the
Mac OS X server services provide.
And of course, with the G5 optimizations,
we've been able to deliver the
performance out of the G5 processor.
And of course, if you've been to any of
the sessions yesterday,
you know that we've introduced Tiger.
And with Tiger Server,
one of the most important things
in the HPC space that we're
able to bring with Tiger is true
64-bit user space environment.
We've been able to break that
4-gigabyte barrier in user space.
I mean, we've always been able to
access more than 4 gigabytes
of memory with the G5 system,
even on Panther.
But now we have the ability to have
applications access large data sets.
So especially code coming
over from other platforms,
from other operating systems,
we're able to take advantage
of that large memory footprint.
Of course, we expect to see a number of
across-the-board improvements
in other areas of Tiger,
improved SMP performance,
improved network performance,
improved NFS performance,
things that we think are going to
really deliver a phenomenal platform
for the future of high-performance
computing with Mac OS X.
It's also interesting – I encourage you
to attend if you're interested in some
of the XSAN sessions later this week.
XSAN is Apple's SAN file
system for Mac OS X.
And XSAN has a role to
play in clusters as well.
With – especially on larger clusters
where file I/O bandwidth is a concern,
XSAN gives you a file system
that has the ability to scale
out in I/O – file I/O services.
So XSAN again plays a role in
high performance clusters as well,
being able to share a large data pool
across a large clustered environment.
[Transcript missing]
Thank you, Doug.
Alright.
So to talk about InfiniBand is
certainly to talk about clusters,
and Doug just gave a
good introduction there.
But what we're seeing in the HPC market
is a lot of transition of supercomputers,
mainframes, SMP machines to a bunch
of interconnected servers.
Why?
The reason is cost.
There's an overriding reason.
We'll see if we can put together one of
these clusters with a bunch of servers
for realistically one-tenth the cost
of some of the existing SMP machines.
Historically, though,
that's been fraught with complexities,
underutilization of processors,
storage bottlenecks,
just the complexity of hooking these up.
So what does it take
to build an effective,
efficient cluster?
You have physical distribution
and logical consolidation.
On the physical side,
you need a high bandwidth.
InfiniBand offers 10 gigabits
and 30 gigabits per second today.
Low latency for
inter-processor communications.
Low CPU overhead,
you don't want the CPU spending all
their processing time communicating
with the other processors.
The ability to scale.
We also need logical consolidation,
the ability to logically group nodes
and systems into logical sets or groups,
domains.
So you need a high
performance interconnect and
an intelligent interconnect.
What InfiniBand brings to the
table is it's an open standard.
So it is the first open standard
interconnect designed from the
ground up for high performance
interconnect and RDMA support.
So the extraneous features and
functions that you might get in
other technologies are not there.
This was designed for the ground up
with high end clustering in mind.
Because of that,
it has the significantly, we think,
lower cost performance ratio than other
options do available for clustering.
The latency is about 140
nanoseconds per hop and 5.8
microseconds end-to-end latency.
Key feature of InfiniBand is
it supports multiple types of
traffic over the same fabric.
So whether it's file, block, network,
IPC, it's all using a single
technology efficiently.
Right from the beginning,
we built in extensive management
monitoring capabilities,
so high availability, quality of service,
partitioning type capabilities
are built in from day one.
Again, it already supports 30
gigabits per second today.
There's something called DDR double
data rate and QDR quad data rate
for supports up to 120 gigabits
per second being worked on today.
So three real key points in FinnaBand:
high bandwidth, low latency,
low CPU utilization,
and the ability to scale.
This is a high level representation
of an SMP machine on the left showing
an 8 processor with a proprietary
interconnect versus four two-way
servers interconnected with InfiniBand.
I want to make it clear the SMP,
the symmetric multiprocessor systems,
will still be a perfect solution
for a lot of applications.
To use the cluster you have to be able
to parallelize the application and
we're looking at near memory speeds.
But the cost performance
compared to the SMP is drastic.
On the InfiniBand link protocol,
I'll just really try to make one
or two points on this overhead.
One is with a single event,
you can move a large amount of
data – two gigabytes of data.
And the entire link protocol
is handled in hardware.
So all reassembly and segmentation and
all that is all handled in hardware.
And we are in the third generation
of ASIC technology for InfiniBand.
Some more InfiniBand link attributes.
Each packet is sent with a service level.
So there's up to 16 service
level supported SLs.
There's also something they call a VL,
virtual lane.
So there's 15 virtual lanes possible
over a single physical link.
So the SL is mapped to a VL,
which is then arbitrated
across the physical link.
Basically,
that is the basis for your quality
of service type implementation,
which lets you mix and match efficiently
different types of traffic across
the same InfiniBand connection.
InfiniBand also defines
what we call partitions.
So this would be similar to zoning and
fiber channel or VLANs in the IP world.
So it's a mechanism for
defining isolated domains.
So each port or node can be defined to
a certain partition and communicate with
only nodes in that partition or given
full or limited rights within that group.
And that's all defined
by the subnet managers,
SM managers by assigning partition keys.
InfiniBand is based on a
2.5 GHz signaling rate.
So when you hear the
rates for InfiniBand,
1x is 2.5.
There were really no implementations
done at that data rate.
4x is really where all
the implementations are,
most of the implementations today.
12x is the 30 gigabits per second.
So today, Voltaire,
we can support the 10 and
30 gigabit per second rates.
Over copper cabling,
it's a 17 meter distance limitation,
1 kilometer with multi-mode fiber.
And then, you see there's efforts to,
in the works, the 5 and 10 gigahertz
signaling rate are in process.
InfiniBand has a very rich
protocol stack to find.
On the upper layer you'll see a
bunch of stuff that looks familiar.
You know, NFS, RDMA in version 4.
NFS will have RDMA, InfiniBand support.
MPI is, I think Doug mentioned,
a message passing interface.
Far and away the most popular
– MPI is the most popular
IPC API in the HPC world.
I think that was four three-letter
acronyms in a short sentence.
So let me see if I can say that again.
So message passing interface is the
most popular application program
and interface for inter-processor
communications in the HPC market.
And that's supported in
the Apple world today.
iSCSI is for storage
support across the fabric.
SDP is Sockets Direct Protocol.
And any application with a
Sockets-level API can utilize that.
Of course, TCP and IP over IB.
And DAPL is
Direct Access Programmer's Library.
A lot of acronyms here.
And DAPL defines the API to RDMA.
And then there's a full suite of
InfiniBand services below that
for management and monitoring.
And in my 10-minute time slot,
we won't be going
through those right now.
And HCA is terminology used
for the host channel adapter.
I think that's sort of an
InfiniBand term just for a net.
Network Interface or Host Bus Adapter.
We call them HCAs.
So what does InfiniBand,
the value it brings to the HPC market?
It's the first industry standard
to enable server clustering.
Doug mentioned Marinette
and there's Quadrix,
two other ones out there that
are proprietary interconnects
that are available.
The clustering is the fastest
growing segment in the HPC market,
so that's why as a company,
Voltaire and Apple working together
are very interested in that space.
Excellent performance
advantages over other options.
We're currently seeing lots of
interest at the universities and labs.
The DOE labs specifically are very
aggressive in pushing forward the
standard and purchasing product
and implementing large clusters.
And pricing has dropped quite a bit.
We're certainly not at what I would
call economies of scale yet,
but we've still seen about a 50% price
reduction in the last 12 months or so.
And we think we'll see more
reductions as we go forward.
Thanks.
as volume increases.
And the Virginia Tech system,
Doug mentioned, 1,105 five-note clusters,
number three in last
November's top 500 list.
Really key, the 5.2 million,
which is a lot of money anywhere,
but for this type of system,
it is literally one-tenth the
cost or greater than that of
the other systems in the top 10.
Want to thank Doug and Apple for
having us here and working with them,
and that's all I've got.
Thanks, John.
We're really excited about Voltaire's
InfiniBand offerings because for
customers who are looking for a very
versatile interconnect with great
latency and bandwidth properties,
InfiniBand is very attractive and gaining
tremendous momentum in the HPC space.
I'd like to move on,
go back to walking up our
HPC building block stack here,
and take a look at compiler
and optimization tools.
You know, the interesting thing about
HPC is that it's really a segment
of end users and developers.
I've never met an HPC to deployment
that's not taking advantage of their own
tools or compiling their own programs.
And so the compiler and the optimization
tools that are needed to really eke out
the most performance out of their code,
becomes a very important
piece of the technology.
From Apple's perspective, of course,
we have Xcode.
And Xcode is just a phenomenal
development environment to be able to
leverage the productivity features,
be able to deliver great user interface,
great tools to build, develop,
debug applications.
I mean,
the fact that I can write a program
on my PowerBook and then send it
up to my cluster for execution,
optimized for the G5,
is incredibly powerful.
And so as we improve Xcode, for example,
the betas that you've received,
the pre-release versions
you've received this week,
actually begin to introduce
some of the 64-bit capabilities
for large memory space.
So you can already begin
working with those tools.
A very important part of Xcode
are actually the CHUD tools.
If you're not familiar with them,
CHUD stands for Computer Hardware
Understanding Development.
And these are tools originally written
internally within Apple to help us
optimize and understand the implications
of code executing on our systems.
These tools turned out to be
extremely powerful and actually
have been made available as part of
our developer tool set and now are a
standard part of Xcode installation.
If you have Xcode installed,
you'll find them right
in your developer folder.
These tools are incredibly important
in this space to be able to
really understand the performance
bottlenecks and implications
of your code running on our systems.
I've seen numerous of examples,
for example,
people who are convinced their code
is processor bound on a G5 and with
some simple profiling with Shark,
for example,
one of the key tools in the CHUD set,
really find out maybe it's more memory
bound and there's some tuning that
can be made to improve throughput.
So these are very,
very important tools to our tool set.
And if you have an opportunity,
I really encourage you to go to
some of the sessions this week
on the CHUD tools for better
understanding of their capabilities.
strategies.
Another important piece
of this space is Fortran.
Fortran continues to be one of the
top scientific programming languages.
And it's an area where Apple works
with third parties to really
develop and provide great
solutions on top of Mac OS X.
So it gives me a lot of pleasure to
introduce Dave Paulmark from IBM,
who's going to talk about XL Fortran.
Dave.
Thanks, Doug.
I'm really happy to be here today.
It's great to be able to stand in front
of a bunch of Apple developers as an
IBMer and talk about our technology.
It's not just the processor this time.
We're going to talk about
some software today.
And some hardware, too.
Let's see.
There we go.
So what have we brought to the
Apple processor and the Mac OS X?
We've got a compiler that's
got a long history behind it.
This is the IBM Fortran compiler that's
been behind our systems since the very
early '90s and even going beyond that.
We use this technology inside
of our C compilers as well.
And we have Excel compilers for both
C++ and Fortran on this platform.
And it's been used by some
very important IBM customers,
mainly on AIX,
but we're starting to see some
movement to Linux and Mac now.
People like LLNL, NERSC, NCAR,
and a European weather forecasting group.
And we deal with these people every day.
We understand their problems.
We understand the kinds of
applications they have to develop.
And we built a compiler for them.
Now, when you pick up XL Fortran,
you're not just getting performance,
you're getting language
standards and conformance.
So, this helps a lot with porting.
If you have something that runs
somewhere else that's conformant,
we're going to be able to handle that.
So, we're fully Fortran 77,
fully Fortran 90, fully Fortran 95,
and we started on Fortran 2003,
which we expect to be ratified
hopefully the end of this year.
But people have asked us for
some things early in that,
and as the standard congealed
and got a little bit more stable,
we went ahead and did
things like IEEE module,
allocatable components,
stream IO – things that
people were asking us for.
And we have people on those standards
committees so that we know what's coming,
and we have a voice in there.
We also handle things like OpenMP,
which we also have folks on
those standards committees.
We're not just standards conformant,
we also have extensions.
Surprised.
It's Fortran.
So we do open MP2.0,
fully compliant to that.
On Mac OS X,
it's a technology preview as yet.
It's a preview of some of the
technology that we've deployed
on AIX and Linux PowerPC.
That's been out there
for quite a while now.
But we do other things
from other companies.
We've got Cray pointers,
128-bit floating point, 64-bit ints,
structure record union map,
and so on and so on.
There's way too many options
to talk about to try and
describe them all in this group.
But suffice to say,
things like structure record union map,
we've had customers come
to us with things like,
"We would like to buy IBM hardware,
but you don't have this." Well,
they got it.
And now they have IBM hardware.
We do that sort of thing all the time.
These kinds of requests come in.
We want to hear what you need,
and we'll talk to you about that.
We've also got some very important
extensions for the PowerPC in particular.
The PowerPC hardware intrinsics functions
and directives get you access at a source
level to the hardware instructions.
You can use something as a
directive or as a function call,
and what you're going to get
there is a particular instruction
that you need at that point.
Something like data prefetch,
for example, is very powerful.
We also give you an XLF utility
module that you can use to get access
to some common system services.
You don't have to go off
and code that yourself.
Now, we're in Xcode,
and that's real exciting.
But for folks that still
like their Unix command line,
we're there too.
We make files still work.
GDB works with us.
We work well with GDB.
Now, as you go up the op levels,
obviously things start to go down a bit,
but we've given – the
support goes down a bit,
but we do have some directives and
so on that you can put in your source
at certain points to get you the
information you need to debug that stack
– that trace back or whatever it is
you're having trouble with at the time.
Something that isn't here
that shouldn't be – Shark.
I love that tool.
I wish we had that on AIX.
We work well with Shark,
and that's the message.
Use it.
You can find some amazing things.
It's one of the most popular
things in Toronto for digging
down into these problems that we
get from our customers when we're
analyzing performance problems.
But it's not always just
debuggers and so on.
We also give you some options to use
for finding problems in your code.
So you can automatically
– Insert checks to find,
you know, oh,
I went off the bounds of that array.
It'll trap and tell you that,
stop you from going off
and corrupting memory.
You know,
automatic initialization of variables
where you need that to happen,
and a rich set of listing information
that you can dig through to understand
what's going on with your program.
The runtime environment.
We have our own Fortran runtime
that we ship with the compiler.
And the message there is that is
something that if you build an
application with Excel Fortran,
you can take that runtime and give it to
your customers as well so that they can
run that Fortran code on their systems.
We give you a lot of tuning
levers and buttons and dials
through environment variables.
And you can control things such as
the characteristics of the I/O that's
going on when you're doing that,
error reporting,
what kinds of messages you want,
do you want to know when
you're doing something that
isn't Fortran 90 conformant,
for example.
You can do that sort of thing.
But in this space, certainly,
thread scheduling models,
number of threads,
thread profiling environment variables,
these are all important things.
and of course all the
things that OpenMP defines,
we've got those.
Now binary compatibility is a
very important thing in this.
You can take our objects,
work with other objects from GCC, G++,
and of course IBM Excel C and C++.
Take that whole bundle, put it together,
and there you go.
You've got your applications mixed
as many languages as you like.
And we've added some things like QFloat,
Complex, GCC, -QX name,
just option names.
The message is, where we need them,
we've added some things to help
out with that binary compatibility.
Now, we exist because of optimization.
If we weren't a good optimizing compiler,
we wouldn't be there in Toronto doing
this every day for the last 14,
15 years.
So, the optimization components that are
in XL4TRAN are in all of IBM's core
compilers and all our important systems.
C++, COBOL, PL1, on AIX, Linux,
the mainframes, Mac, and now P-Series,
I-Series, and of course G4, G5.
The message is, we've taken all that,
that we've built up over
those number of years,
and all those different platforms,
and brought it down
to the Apple platform,
and we're seeing some really
important success with that.
The XL compilers are used by IBM on
AIX to announce spec performance numbers.
So again, the message is we know how
to tune for those chips.
IBM does the chips,
we work with the chip designers,
we know what's coming,
we know how to tune for those things.
And we build our own software with it.
AIX, DB2, Lotus, Domino – they're all
built with IBM compilers,
as you might expect.
Optimization options.
We go to five at the base level,
so zero all the way to 05.
And you can go from basically
almost no optimization up to,
wow, what did this thing do to my code?
I can't recognize it anymore.
And we've got a whole set of, again,
switches, dials, knobs,
and levers that you can play
with in order to tune the
optimization to what you need to
have happen on your application.
Things like -qhot enables the high
order transformation loop optimizer.
It was built to understand Fortran
90 array language and syntax.
It can take those loops and do
some amazing things with them.
It'll also work with C code,
C loops as well,
when you use it in our C compiler.
The qarch option tells
you on the Mac OS machine,
do you want to target a generic PowerPC,
in other words, G4,
or do you want to go to G5,
which I'm sure most of this
group is interested in.
And that enables,
inside of our optimizer,
all the modeling and tuning
capabilities that we bring to bear from,
that we brought up,
and specifically done, well,
person years of effort tuning to the G5.
Gives you access to all - well,
it doesn't give you,
it gives the optimizer - using qarch
G5 allows the optimizer to precisely
model your code as it's going to see it.
Because it understands the chip,
understands how many units are going,
and how to keep that processor busy.
That's what it's trying to
do with the scheduling model.
And using qarch G5 also gives you access
to those rich set of PowerPC intrinsics,
again, that you can use for
things like cache control,
certain arithmetic options.
That you might need.
And floating point control,
you want to toggle things in
the status and control register,
for example.
And the nice thing about that,
if you're interested in moving your
code from one IBM kind of system,
one IBM chip to another,
those same intrinsics work on compatible
chips if you're going to AIX or Linux.
Same story in the other direction.
You have some code up there on AIX,
you want to bring down to G5,
those intrinsics are going to work too.
Those intrinsics are going to work too.
IPA is sort of the keystone of
our optimization technology and
really differentiates us in what
we can do with your application.
When you've got IPA involved in your
compiler and in your compile and
it runs automatically at 04 and 05,
what it does for you is when you
compile your code is it inserts
information into your object.
Which is essentially
invisible to the linker.
So if you just take those
objects and feed them into LD,
out comes your ADOT out and you're happy.
But if you then use IPA when
you link your application,
it then extracts that information
that's hidden away in the .Os
and re-optimizes your code again,
this time not on a file-by-file basis,
but it's got the entire
application there.
It's got all the .Os that
make up the whole thing.
And it understands that called that,
and it was called with this,
and it was called with that,
and so we don't have to
worry about this parameter,
we'll just stick a 7 in there.
That kind of thing.
So what it can do is it re-partitions
your application into more logical
units that keep memory together
and does massive amounts of
inlining where it makes sense.
And it can even go across languages.
So if you build your
application mixed mode with C,
C++, and Fortran, if you build all that
with IBM Excel compilers,
run the IPA link step,
it will do things like take
your C code and inline it
into your Fortran application.
And that's an amazing technology that
we've been able to bring down to the G5.
And of course after it does all that,
then we go back down into the
low level optimizer again,
which is the one that really
understands the chip and tunes for that.
PDF – Profile Directed Feedback
is another important technology,
especially useful for codes where you
may have it instrumented with debug or
perhaps some tuning information that
you want to use to gather statistics.
What PDF will do for you is you build
your application once with -qpdf1,
run your application
with typical sample data,
That will write out a statistics file,
compile your application again with PDF2,
and it will read that statistics file,
and that will tell the optimizer, "Oh,
look, 99% of the time you take
the branch this way,
not this way." And so we can take
your most frequently executed
code and put that in line,
and the stuff that almost never
executes goes off to the side,
and you get a much better
performance out of that.
And of course, again,
the message is the Excel compilers
share the technology,
so you can,
if you build stuff with our C compilers,
use PDF, you can mix that in with
the Fortran compiler.
OpenMP and SMP are very
important to this space,
and we've got a lot of
experience with these.
Again,
technology preview on Mac OS X right now,
but again, we're bringing that down from
some platforms where we've had
a lot of time to work on that.
We fully implement the 2.0 standard and
the important thing about OpenMP for
us is our optimizer fully understands
what OpenMP is and what SMP is.
And so we can take things like a -qsmp
auto option and put it in our compiler
where it can take a look at your
application and automatically parallelize
things where it makes sense to do so.
So you've got a couple of choices
in the way you want to do things.
If you want to code to
the OpenMP standard,
that's great.
We'll handle that.
But we'll also automatically
parallelize for you where we can.
And again,
it's another one with dozens of switches
that I can't talk about right now.
We give you lots of directives
and options on the optimizer,
as I said before.
There's a couple of variations on this,
where you can go into your source
and say things about your code,
say this loop has this characteristic,
and that'll give the optimizer even more
opportunities to go and do things that it
might not be able to recognize otherwise.
But in some cases you want
to constrain the optimizer.
A lot of older code especially may
not be 100% standards compliant,
so things like -q alias, non-standard,
will let you crank up the
optimization level and still
have your code run correctly,
even though it might not be as opportune
as if your code was standards conformant.
And of course things like -qprefetch and
- will automatically insert prefetching
directives where that's useful.
Had a great example of that yesterday
where we had a gentleman in the lab
across the hall working with us.
We brought his code in and
just with some analysis with
Shark and looking at things,
we stuck in one directive and speeded
up the core loop in his application by a
factor of two just by doing a prefetch.
So, the summary is: IBM XL, Fortran,
and XL-C bring to the Apple G5
systems technology that's been
in the works at IBM since,
honestly, the mid-80s.
And it's been improved every year.
We have a large team in Toronto,
and we work closely with the chip folks.
We're fully backed by IBM's
premier customer service.
It doesn't matter if you buy the compiler
from Appsoft or you buy it from IBM.
It's still the team in Toronto that's
going to be looking after you.
Our standards compliance and the
large range of extensions that
we have let you bring your code
down from pretty much anywhere.
It will help you out with
things that you need.
Thank you.
Thanks Dave.
Great, thank you Dave.
Okay, continuing along our stack,
I wanted to talk a little bit
about communications middleware.
This is typically what we see
as the MPI layers of a cluster.
The great thing about Mac OS X, again,
leveraging off that Unix foundation,
is that just about all the major
MPI stacks have been brought
over to Mac OS X and run really,
really well.
As a matter of fact,
some of them have been really optimized
for Mac OS X and are available,
for example,
LAMMPI as a package installer
for really ease of installation
right on top of Mac OS X.
So, great selection of tools.
As a matter of fact,
if you have experience with
a particular MPI stack,
hopefully you'll see that the
exact same stack is available on
Mac OS X and can leverage that
familiarity on the platform.
So, both open source and commercial
stacks available for Mac OS X.
There are a number of
other pieces of middleware.
Obviously, we talked about OpenMP,
Globus, PVM, Paradise Linda from SCA,
and a recent product, Accelerate,
from Gridiron Software,
all also fall into this
communications middleware stack.
And, of course,
all are available on Mac OS X.
Finally,
I wanted to touch on management tools.
This is an area where we
think Mac OS X really shines.
Because again,
you have the best of breed tools
available from Apple to really
make managing these systems,
particularly head nodes and
things where you're providing file
services and network services,
are able to provide very,
very ease of use for system
administrators managing,
you know, whether it be a small
cluster or a large cluster.
We also have the benefit of great
open source tools to really provide
added value and functionality.
So if we drill into this, of course,
first of all,
we start with Apple's management tools.
Server admin,
work group manager for providing
kind of the bread and butter,
you know, file services, DNS, DHCP,
directory services, things that kind of,
you know, you forget about, but,
you know, it's a network infrastructure.
You need these to support
cluster operations.
I wanted to highlight Server Monitor,
the tool that's unique to Xserve.
Xserve G5 has over 30,000 servers.
It has over 30 sensors
on the logic board.
I like to joke it's one of
the most instrumented one-use
servers in the industry.
Server Monitor is the tool that allows
you to wrap up that data and provide that
status information about the hardware.
Temperatures, predictive drive failures,
power consumption,
all that data is available
in Server Monitor.
It's a great complement when you're
managing a large number of machines.
Beyond that,
we also have a new piece of technology
from Apple introduced not too long ago.
It's a technology that's really,
really cool.
It's called Xgrid.
It's a technology preview,
which is Xgrid.
Again,
taking that ease-of-use approach of how
do we make deploying clusters easier,
how do we make distributed
computing easier,
Xgrid's really a great solution
for these class of problems where
you want to distribute workloads
across a number of machines.
What's interesting about it is
that not only can it take advantage
of dedicated cluster resources,
such as a rack of Xserves,
you can also bring ad hoc
resources through rendezvous,
and you can bring technologies
out across to desktops and
other machines on your network.
The recent technology preview, too,
added MPI support,
which makes running and dispatching
MPI jobs across your cluster much easier.
And of course,
it provides great user interface
all the way down to the tachometer
to let you see how much performance
you're getting on your jobs.
So we're really excited about Xgrid.
And of course,
now with it being brought into Tiger,
it's going to be very broadly
available to Mac and Mac users.
ECOS 10 systems.
Finally, I wanted to touch on some of
the leading open source and
commercial tools in this space,
most notably schedulers.
Again,
the top schedulers available in the
industry are available on Mac OS X.
Platform LSF in the commercial space,
PBS and OpenPBS, Sun Grid Engine,
now called N1 Grid Engine,
even the Maui Scheduler
are available for Mac OS X.
And also some of the leading
cluster management monitoring tools,
tools like Gangly and Big Brother,
also available for Mac OS X.
And very valuable resources there.
So in summary,
if we look from all the way from the
hardware up to the management tools,
we have a really compelling set
of products and technologies,
both from Apple and
industry-leading third parties,
that allow you to build really
phenomenal cluster solutions
with Mac OS X and PowerPC G5 at
the foundation of this stack.
What I'd like to do is now introduce
some customers who are going to talk
about how they've deployed Xserve and
Mac OS X Server to solve some of their
high performance computing needs.
First customer I'd like
to introduce is actually
Ben Singer from Princeton University,
who's going to talk about his
deployment of Xserve in their center.
Ben?
Thanks, Doug.
It's a delight to be here.
I'm here to talk about – a little bit
about the Princeton XServe cluster
at the Center for the Study of Brain,
Mind,
and Behavior that we're still setting up.
We got it about a month ago and
[Transcript missing]
So really what we are is a place that
provides resources for all these faculty.
And we have staff and we have
resources in the computing
and data acquisition area.
And on the staff side,
there's software engineers,
MRI physicists, system administrator,
and administrators for
running the center.
The big data acquisition instrument
that I was alluding to is the
MRI brain scanner from Siemens
that we picked up a few years ago.
And it was the first – at
the time it was installed,
it was the first
research-only installation.
So most of the time when you use an MRI,
it's in a hospital setting.
So it has first priority for clinical
applications and you end up doing
work at 3 in the morning or something.
And one nice thing about our
facility is that it's there just
a few doors away in the psychology
building from the CSBMB staff center.
And that provides all the data that
I'm going to be talking about and
why we ended up getting an Xserve.
We already had a file server when
I went shopping for a cluster,
which was actually the first
thing they had me do when
I came about six months ago.
And that was in place already.
It's a BlueArc 9TB file server
to store all this data that
comes from the MRI brain scanner.
And we need to back it up
and we need to process it.
So that's how we ended up
with 64 Xserve G5 nodes.
And I'm going to explain a little
bit about how we chose the Xserve.
But before I do that,
I want to just say what it is from a
computing perspective that what we do.
What we do is motivating us to
pursue an Xserve in the first place.
We have a whole lot of brain
data coming out of the MRI.
A single study will produce
hundreds of gigabytes of data.
You take a single scan from somebody
and if you're doing functional MRI,
even though a single slice of
the brain is at lower resolution,
64 squared image,
you're taking 25 slices and then you're
taking maybe 30 of these a second.
And in one experiment recently
we had subjects watch Raiders of
the Lost Ark for two hours and
recorded their brain for two hours.
That produces a lot of data.
And so we did that with multiple
subjects too because we want to see
are their brains doing the same thing
when they're watching this movie.
That's sort of a fun example.
And to crunch through that is
going to take some computing power.
The other thing is people are
moving their head in the scanner.
They have a little head rest
so we tell them not to move but
they still do and that's natural.
And so we need to align every image with
the first one or some reference and that
takes a lot of time in the workflow.
So does filtering in space and time.
There's a lot of noise coming.
This data when you first get it is
not like suddenly something pops out
at you and you know exactly what's
happening except in very simple cases.
There's a lot of noise in the data.
It needs to be filtered out.
There's other machines in the room
that will put a signature in the data,
maybe some low frequency noise,
maybe high frequency noise.
So you have to do filtering.
And then finally you need to
do a statistical analysis.
And you're comparing brains where
they were just sitting there doing
nothing with when they were doing
the task that you have them do.
And so comparing those two things
is a simple statistical test.
But you need to do it for
every voxel in the brain.
So that's thousands,
hundreds of thousands of voxels.
And that can take traditionally days
of CPU time to do a single study.
And one problem with that is that when
people are – they've got all this data
and it takes all this time to analyze it,
they don't tend to play with it much.
They don't tend to try new things or
look at it from a new angle because
there's a big cost to doing that.
They're going to tie up the
lab resources for a day.
They can't just put this data on
their portable and run away with it.
They have to stay and use
up the center resources.
And sometimes people won't do it.
And so it just stifles creativity.
That's one thing.
So why did we choose Xserve?
Well, when I first started looking
– and we all were a group,
but I was sort of the one that
was doing it at the time – I got
really my head deep into benchmarks.
And although the Xserve does
really well with benchmarks,
I think the reason we chose it
wasn't just because of benchmarks.
But anyway,
let me point out the benchmark
that I have on the slide.
The AFNI Speedo score is
from the AFNI package.
It's from the
National Institute of Technology.
National Institute of Health.
It's a free software package
for analyzing MRI brain scans.
And off the website where they published
their single processor 32-bit benchmarks
come the bottom three bars here.
And then I ran it last
week on our Xserve,
and it came out a little better.
This benchmark tests the whole system.
So maybe it was IO or something
that caused the Xserve to
do better than the desktop,
even though it's a little
bit more expensive.
But anyway,
let me point out the benchmark
that I have on the slide.
The Xserve does really
well with benchmarks.
And although it has the same speed chip.
We also knew that in the future,
Apple's operating system would be
fully 64-bit to do a fair comparison
with that compile on 64-bit Linux.
So we knew it would get better.
The power and the cooling,
as has been alluded to earlier,
were a great story for us because we are
in a small area and we said we wanted
to get 64 nodes in the facilities.
People laughed at us.
So we said, well,
how if we put it in that room there?
And they said, well, good luck.
So we thought about it.
We did get them to put in some
additional air conditioning.
And then we looked at the stats
and the specs and the G5 Xserve,
which had just come out at the time,
the specs showed that it used about
half the power and the cooling,
I think, roughly at that time.
And we were really happy with that.
So we could actually buy it.
It was actually a great, great feeling.
And we knew that we'd be able to cool it.
And it's also very quiet.
I think in the last session,
Bud Tribble mentioned that we
went into the room with them
all on for the first time.
And there was this strange
high-pitched noise.
And we thought, oh, great,
this is going to be kind of noisy.
It turned out it was the two
Dell PowerEdges in the far.
So we were happy with that.
The great thing – we have a whole lot
of people that are – we're coming off an
SGI system and a bunch of Linux systems,
so there were a lot of people that said,
well, we're not going to be able to use
these open source packages and we're
going to have to recompile them.
Well, I've been – in the beginning
of the process of porting,
it's been really pretty easy to do.
The G5 is becoming a more and more
popular target in GCC make files
for the packages that we depend on,
including AFNI.
And so, in fact, they even have a binary
distribution for the G5 already.
So that was great.
And the administration of this thing
has been really straightforward so far.
We're really still bringing it up,
but the server admin and the server
monitor tools that Doug showed in one
of his slides have been really helpful.
I can just bring up my G4 desktop
and look on the screen and see
what's going on with the cluster.
And I don't have to be
a full-time sysadmin.
Amen.
This is our system.
What's a little different about us
is what I emphasized in this slide.
We have all this data and we
have this file server already,
so we sort of had to work with it.
And so we have this second network.
Each G5 node has two built-in
Ethernet ports on the back,
and so we decided to use both of them,
which when we were setting it up,
we realized we had to do 256
crimps of network cables,
so we were wondering why we did that.
But then we realized
once we set it all up,
and we had a lot of help
from Apple doing that,
and someone came and did most of the
crimps and redid the ones that I did.
and David We got all this
stuff up and running.
And what we have here,
we have a foundry switch that
we got along with this thing,
this XServe cluster.
I shouldn't call it a thing.
It's got a few gigabit ports on it,
which goes to our existing
Blue Arc file server,
which is an appliance, sort of,
as most of its software is in firmware.
And we connect out to the world with
that into the head node of our cluster.
Our cluster in red uses what
Apple ships with the cluster,
the Asante gigabit switches.
And then down below is the
foundry connections going.
And that's where all the
NFS traffic is between – well,
it stays on its own network,
so it doesn't interfere with what's
going on on the other network.
And most of our applications
are single processor,
embarrassingly parallel,
so we don't have a need for MPI yet or
any of the high speed interconnects.
So we were happy with this.
And we just need to
move a lot of data on,
churn it, churn and run it,
and then we can churn it,
churn and work on it for a couple
hours and then write it back out.
So we didn't have a need to do MPI yet.
And there will be a lot
of opportunity for that.
Just to
[Transcript missing]
Thank you, Ben.
Okay.
The second customer I'd
like to introduce is Dr.
John Medeiros.
Now, if you read any news last week,
you may have heard about a small little
cluster going in down in Huntsville,
Alabama, a 1,566-node cluster being
put together by Colsa.
And I'd like to introduce Dr.
John Medeiros,
the senior scientist from Colsa,
who's going to tell you a
little bit more about it.
Thank you, Doug.
Thank you.
As Doug mentioned,
I want to talk to you about our
cluster and tell you a bit about
it and about why we got it.
But to put things in
context a little bit,
I'd like to tell you a
bit about who we are,
what kind of computing we do,
and why we need so much of it,
and what process we go through to
pick the cluster system that we did,
and why we picked the Xserve cluster.
In any case, who is Colsa?
Well, we're a small engineering
services contractor,
about 800 people, based in Huntsville,
Alabama, as Doug mentioned.
And we have a few offices
throughout the U.S.
I have to mention our company president,
Al Sullivan, and Dr.
Tony DiRienzo,
our executive vice president,
who actually have championed
this project for us,
providing a lot of corporate support
for the vision that we have in terms
of bringing that system to business.
My particular project I'm
involved in is the hypersonic
missile technology program,
and we have a dedicated corporate
facility that we recently
renovated for the system called
the Research and Operations Center,
so that makes us the HMT Rock,
which sounds a bit like a radio station,
but really the only music
there is on the iPods.
Anyway, our program manager there is Mr.
Mike Whitlock, and I'm the technical
lead on the project.
Our primary customer is the U.S.
Army's
Research Development Engineering Command
out of Redstone Arsenal,
RDECOM.
And the principal scientists there
on that project are the doctors
Billy Walker and Kevin Kennedy.
So what kind of computing requirements
are there for the project?
Well,
supporting their hypersonic aerodynamic
This session focuses on the
computational fluid dynamic analysis of
the hypersonic endo-atmospheric regime,
that is,
the very fast and near Earth atmosphere.
The cartoons on the right show some
of the schematic data that comes out
– visualized data that comes out of it
– where you display parameters in the
space around an object flying very fast.
And it's in fact a very complex
and difficult problem that we are
simply attacking by brute force
using a code that's proprietary,
double precision,
Fortran code to solve the Navier-Stokes
partial differential equations.
And it explores the full combustion
chemistry that goes on in that regime.
And we explore problem sizes with the
space around an object divided into
20 million or more individual points
at which the computations are done.
That's a lot of points,
but the good news is that the blocks
of those points can be assigned to a
given processor and computations are
carried out within that processor.
And then the results are compared,
stepped through, and iterations continue.
And as a result,
the way that this whole process works,
the problem is very CPU intensive and
very little time relatively is spent
in inter-processor communications.
It's in the category which you might
call almost embarrassingly parallel,
which is good from our point of view.
And in fact drove the design of the
kind of cluster that we went after.
Now we've been doing some computing
in this project for a while,
and we've done it.
Well, systems we have include a
traditional supercomputer system.
We have an IBM SP Power 3 system
and 284 CPUs that when we got it,
as pictured there, back in June of 2000,
it came in as number
47 on the top 500 list.
And four years later today,
it's completely off the list.
It gives you an idea of
how things are progressing.
So our goal was, I mean,
for this project,
like it can't be too rich or too thin
or have too much computational power.
We need a lot more than this.
And mainframes,
as expensive as they were,
while they work very well,
were too expensive to get to the kind
of computational levels that we wanted.
So we began exploring clusters.
And in the interim,
since we got that mainframe system,
we've acquired and put together and
played with a number of clusters
and explored a whole range of
architectures from major vendors,
including AMD, Intel, and Apple.
Our first system back in June of 2000
was a 34 processor AMD Athlon system.
And about the same timeframe,
a little later,
we acquired a 34 processor
AMD Athlon system.
And about the same timeframe,
a little later,
we acquired a 34 processor
AMD Athlon system.
And we had a G4 system
about the same size,
which at that time, I believe,
was probably one of the
biggest Apple clusters around.
That system performed fairly well,
but it was only 800 MHz,
and we wanted to scale
up very substantially.
So we want to look at other architectures
including rack mounted obviously.
Only a few of the
systems that we have now,
we've worked with, are shown here.
The first, up or two,
for historical reasons,
were the early days of
looking at clustering.
So we did tower systems
for PCs and Apples,
and that little Apple cluster system
we affectionately called Apple Orchard.
We've looked at 64-bit
systems very extensively,
including the Optron system.
And a lot of our computations
now are done on an
Intel architecture 32-bit system.
You can see there our largest cluster
now is a 522 processor system.
But we, in fact, needed larger, more.
So we explored additional possibilities.
Now the whole thing is set up in this
un-presupposing building in Huntsville
that we acquired back late last year.
And the building was gutted internally,
virtually internally.
And this shows the computer room
being put together back last fall.
And we renovated it
literally from top to bottom,
the ceiling and the computer room floor.
We've got about 3,000 square
feet of computer room floor.
And this shows our configuration with
that 522 processor Intel architecture
system on the left as you see it.
Our SP mainframe system on the right.
And center is what I'm going
to be talking about here,
the cluster system that we
are acquiring from Apple.
Okay, how do you pick such a system?
You have to benchmark it.
And from our point of view,
the only benchmark that
counted was our application.
So we ran our code using sort
of a simplified geometry,
but the full complexity of the problem
in terms of a reasonable problem size
and full combustion chemistry with
a whole range of chemical species.
What we did find, among other things,
in testing across the
whole range of processors,
that the inter-processor communication,
as I mentioned, is a small fraction of
the total compute time.
That is, in a given iteration,
we found that that might
take typically a few seconds.
The amount of time that was done in
communicating between processors,
between those iterations,
was in the range of milliseconds.
So there was very little penalty
in worrying about the interconnect,
which is why, in fact,
we've chosen gigabit
Ethernet for the system.
Let me go back a minute.
The last point about it,
part of the reason for doing that,
of course,
is that these other interconnects,
as you've already heard about
previously in the session,
you can get better performance for
a broader range of applications,
but the cost difference is not trivial
compared to the Gigabit Ethernet switch.
Okay, this shows
Yes.
Some of the data that we used and the
kinds of things that drove our decision.
What you see in there,
and this is a log log plot of the time
to do a given step of the computation
as a function of the number of
processors you throw at the problem.
For all the different processors,
five are shown there on this chart.
you see they're actually scaled
very well for our kind of problem.
That is as you double
the number of processors,
the processing time cuts in half.
The grouping there,
if you can make it out,
this is a log-log plot,
but it does break up
naturally into two groups.
The upper two for the Athlon and
Xeon systems are 32-bit systems.
And the bottom three, Optron,
Titanium II,
and G5s are the 64-bit systems.
The lower is better on this chart.
The less time it takes
to do an iteration,
the more of them you can do
in a given amount of time,
the more processing you can do.
And on that basis,
you can see that the G5, in fact,
performed the best.
Now, this particular comparison is
maybe not a little bit fair
because these were different
processors with different speeds.
So the next chart is the same data.
This time all the results were
normalized as if each of the processors
had the same 2 GHz clock speed.
They didn't,
but you can normalize the data that
way just for demonstration purposes.
What you see here is the results
are essentially the same,
they're not changed very much,
and the only difference here now
is that the Itanium 2 looks a
little bit better than the G5.
It's a little bit faster on that chart.
But you've got to keep in
mind that Itanium 2 is not
available at any cost for 2 GHz,
and at its fastest implementation,
about 1.5 GHz,
a system built with Itanium
2s comparable to the G5 would
cost about 5 times as much.
So, G5s it
Okay, well, process is one thing,
but there's a lot of issues in
putting together a big cluster.
Now, we've put together,
as you kind of saw,
clusters that are pretty reasonable size,
but even for us, this is a big cluster.
And there are a lot of issues
that come up in terms of scale,
but there's a whole laundry list of
things that I'm going to show here.
I'm not going to go
through them in detail,
except to highlight a couple things
that you've heard before today,
and I want to emphasize them yet again.
Power and cooling on the bottom.
Especially at this kind of scale,
This is very much non-trivial.
For example, for the current system that
Apple is delivering to us right now,
as we're getting it in,
We've had to upgrade our
power into the building.
I'll tell you about that in a minute.
But just to give you an idea,
something we haven't shared with
our corporate executives yet,
but just to run the system,
our utility bill for the year is going to
run about $250,000 just to keep it going.
Cooling is also, of course,
a very important issue.
And just like power,
you can calculate how
much cooling you need,
and you can get that
cooling into your facility.
But in addition,
we have the added complication
that you've got to get the
cooling to the right place,
and you've got to look at how you
distribute that and remove the
heat and bring in the cooler air.
So that's something
that we're playing with,
and we expect to actually
have to fuss with a fair bit
over the next little while.
So how do we do this process?
We decided it was going to be G5s,
but you can't say that when you're
buying on a government contract.
You've got to be generic, and we did.
We put a general request for quotes
out to the community at large,
and one of the quotes we got back,
in fact, was the G5 system,
coincidentally.
But the requirements that we had
included a theoretical performance for
the system of at least 25 teraflops.
We wanted a processor
count in excess of 3,000.
We wanted all the fit into a
1,000-square-foot footprint,
excuse me.
Wanted minimal power and
cooling requirements,
and we wanted it all delivered
by 12 July this year.
And you don't want to pay
a lot for this cluster.
We didn't share with the vendors what
the cost figure we had in mind was.
We had to go for the lowest bid.
But we wanted the whole thing,
including the switch and all the
ancillary equipment we need with it,
to come in at under $6 million and
we're going to make that target.
So the system award exclusive
of the network component was
done on 17th of May this year.
So that's really a three week turnaround,
which is in this business is a very
short timeframe for getting that done,
but we wanted it.
We're calling it Mach5.
It stands for Multiple Advanced Computers
for Hypersonics Using G5s.
We've got 1562 dual Xserve G5
compute nodes and 4 head nodes.
And these nodes are being
delivered as we speak.
In fact,
there was a lot of complaining back home
that I get to play and come here and
attend WWDC while they're working on
putting the system together back there,
and I've got to fly back there
tomorrow because I couldn't get
much more time off than that.
The systems we've taken delivery
about 350 nodes as of yesterday,
and it's coming in at a tractor
trailer load worth a day.
Consists of 25 pallets
of a dozen Xserves,
and everybody's got to pull them out,
assemble them, rack them,
get them hooked up.
At that kind of scale,
it gets kind of interesting.
So the physical configuration is
going to be set up in 40 racks
with 39 XServe nodes in each.
Each rack, these are 42 U racks,
and a 48 port gigabit
Ethernet switch in that rack.
The switch we're getting from
Foundry Networks is actually a very
high performance gigabit switch,
and will work great for our purposes,
we believe.
And one rack includes 4 head nodes,
a couple more cluster nodes,
and a large 320 port gigi main
switch that are trunked from the,
through the main switch.
to which the individual 48 port switches
at each of the nodes are trunked,
and access the nexus
for the cluster network.
The whole thing occupies
less than 600 square feet,
so it beats the thousand square
foot limitation that we imposed.
And we're expecting to draw about 400
kilowatts of peak power for the system.
And we're having – we didn't have
that much – enough power being brought
into the building at that point.
And we had Huntsville Utilities
bring us in a new transformer
rated at over 2 megawatts.
We're planning to build
actually a bigger system,
but that's another story.
For cooling, we know we require about
110 tons of cooling.
For those of you who might
not be familiar with that,
the ton unit that is used to rate these
big chillers is an archaic unit in the
heating industry that relates to being
able to remove the latent heat of fusion
of water in one ton of water in one day.
That is, make a ton of ice in a day.
So, we've got 150 tons of that installed,
and if we ever get out of
the computing business,
I guess we could make a lot of ice.
[Transcript missing]
As I mentioned,
the system's being delivered.
And these are pictures we took
last week before we came out here.
And those were the first 40 units
packed in the high bay being delivered.
Some work's still going on in the
computer room in terms of getting the
rest of the infrastructure set up.
And you see some of the guys
working on putting in some
of the hardware in the racks.
Now we've got 40 racks,
and a man all these Xserves in the racks.
You have to put these little
clips to which you can screw
into to get the rack in there.
You gotta put them in
the front and the back.
And for this many, we calculated,
the guys had to put in
over 14,000 such clips.
They did it in an afternoon.
We had a bunch of folks working on it.
Okay, so to kind of wind down
the story a little bit,
to give you some perspective on the
progression of computer technology,
I'm comparing here that mainframe
system we acquired back in
2000 to Mach 5 coming in now.
And cost-wise,
we're paying a little bit more – $6
million compared to $4 million back then,
so it's about 5% more.
Floor space is about twice as much.
However, for that, we get more than 10
times more processors,
and we get more than 60
times more performance.
So in summary,
we chose the Apple's XServe G5
architecture for a major production
cluster for computational fluid
dynamic analysis and hypersonic flight.
The proposal we got from
Apple on the Xserve G5 delivered
the best bang for the buck.
In essence, best price performance.
Now, as I've kind of mentioned,
Mach 5 has been designed for a
compute-intensive problem with
relatively little demand on network.
Now that means,
in terms of standard measures
that put systems on the top 500,
it will not do as well, relatively,
as a system sort of purpose design
with a higher speed network.
That being said,
we fully expect to achieve something
over 12 teraflops of real performance,
and we believe we might be able to get
up to 15 teraflops of real performance.
If we can do that,
we'll still be easily in the top five
when the November list comes out.
Hopefully we can get there.
So as I mentioned, just to finish up,
the system is being installed and
we hope to get it into production,
actually get it working by the fall.
And from the solicitation of the
system to actually production work,
we're looking for a six-month timeframe,
which is pretty phenomenal for
a system of this kind of scale.
And we hope it works out.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Okay, well, we're running a little late,
so just to summarize and
finish up the session.
What I really wanted to say is, you know,
Apple is investing in the high
performance computing market.
We're doing it through our products,
our technologies,
and the solutions that we're providing.
Working very closely to make sure
the right solutions are available,
both from third parties and
the open source community.
And the adoption has
really been phenomenal,
and momentum continues.
So, in summary, you know,
Apple has products from
the workgroup cluster,
turnkey, easy to use, and bioinformatics,
all the way up to, you know,
the top supercomputers.
So with that, thank you very much.
Unfortunately,
we're running out of time for formal Q&A,
but if there are any questions,
it will be available up front
for any questions you might have.